README.md, before:

# File-Format-Comparison-Parquet-vs-Vortex

Simple benchmark to compare Parquet vs Vortex using DuckDB. The code loads a dataset into DuckDB, writes Parquet and Vortex, then runs the same queries on both formats.

## Approach
We compare formats inside DuckDB so the query engine is the same for both.

Pipeline:
1) Ingest CSV or Parquet into an in-memory DuckDB table.
2) Write Parquet (DuckDB COPY, compressed).
3) Write Vortex (DuckDB Vortex extension).
4) Run the same queries on Parquet and Vortex scans.
5) Save results to CSV/JSON/Markdown.

## Metrics
For each format we record:
- write time (compression_time_s) — lower is better
- output size (reported as size_mb) — lower is better
- compression ratio (input_size_bytes / output_size_bytes) — higher is better
- query latencies (median and p95) — lower is better
- selectivity timings for several percentiles — lower is better
- LIKE predicate timings on text columns — lower is better
- encoding schemes (Parquet metadata; Vortex best-effort) — informational
- validation checks (row count, min(), filtered count, null counts) — should match base table

Queries used:
- full_scan_min: `min(min_col)` over the full table
- selective_predicate: `min(min_col)` with `filter_col = filter_val`
- random_access: `SELECT * ... WHERE random_access_col = value LIMIT 1` (point lookup)
- selectivity: `min(min_col)` with `select_col <= threshold` at 1%, 10%, 25%, 50%, 90%

Column roles:
- min_col: the column used for `min(...)` queries (numeric/date with real variation)
- filter_col / filter_val: used to build the selective_predicate filter
- random_access_col: used for the point-lookup query
- select_cols: the list of columns used for selectivity curves

LIKE predicate tests:
- prefix: `pattern%`
- suffix: `%pattern`
- contains: `%pattern%`
We try to match target selectivities and report the actual match rate.

NDV ratio:
- Defined as NDV / rows for each column.
- Reported per column (top-10) and averaged by type (numeric/text/date/bool/other).

When `--auto-cols` is used, selectivity is run across all numeric/date columns that are not constant.

Recommendations in the report:
- storage-first: picks the format with the highest compression_ratio
- read-latency-first: picks the format with the lowest random_access median
- scan-first: picks the format with the lowest full_scan_min median

CSV row counts in the report:
- Input rows: number of rows in the CSV file (line count minus header if present).
- Dropped rows: `input_rows - loaded_rows`.
- Drop notes: short reasons (e.g., malformed rows, type conversion failures).

## Current results (from `out/`)
Reports already generated are stored under:
- `out/report_*.md` and `out/report_*.json`
- `out/results_*.csv`
- `out/overall_summary.md` and `out/overall_summary.json`

Observed patterns in those reports:
- Parquet output is usually smaller.
- Vortex often gives faster random-access timings.
- Exact numbers depend on the dataset and parsing options.

Check the latest report files for the full numbers:
- `out/report_CityMaxCapita_1.md`
- `out/report_Euro2016_1.md`
- `out/report_IGlocations1_1.md`
- `out/report_MedPayment2_1.md`

## Files and responsibilities
- `bench/run.py`: main runner and CLI
- `bench/utils_run.py`: helper functions (auto-pick logic, SQL formatting, timing, validation, markdown)
- `bench/ingest/generic_ingest.py`: CSV/Parquet ingestion
- `bench/backends/parquet_backend.py`: Parquet write + scan expression
- `bench/backends/vortex_backend.py`: Vortex write + scan expression (DuckDB extension)
- `bench/report/report.py`: CSV/JSON/Markdown writers
- `bench/report/plots.py`: plot generation
- `bench/report/summary.py`: overall summary (markdown + JSON)

## Install
From this folder:
```bash
pip install -r bench/requirements.txt
```

## How to run

### 1) CSV with auto-pick (safe parsing)
Use when CSV is pipe-delimited and has no header (example: CityMaxCapita_1_vor.csv).
```bash
python3 bench/run.py \
  --input ../CityMaxCapita_1_vor.csv \
  --input-type csv \
  --auto-cols \
  --csv-delimiter '|' \
  --csv-header false \
  --csv-nullstr null \
  --csv-sample-size -1 \
  --out out
```

### 2) CSV with schema (strict types)
Use when you have a schema file and want fixed types.
```bash
python3 bench/run.py \
  --input ../Euro2016_1.csv \
  --input-type csv \
  --schema ../Euro2016_1.table.sql \
  --table Euro2016_1 \
  --csv-delimiter '|' \
  --csv-header false \
  --csv-nullstr null \
  --csv-ignore-errors \
  --auto-cols \
  --out out
```

### 3) Vortex options and validation (enabled by default)
```bash
python3 bench/run.py \
  --input ../Euro2016_1.csv \
  --input-type csv \
  --schema ../Euro2016_1.table.sql \
  --table Euro2016_1 \
  --csv-delimiter '|' \
  --csv-header false \
  --csv-nullstr null \
  --csv-ignore-errors \
  --auto-cols \
  --vortex-compact \
  --vortex-cast column01:BIGINT,column10:VARCHAR \
  --vortex-drop-cols tweet \
  --validate-io \
  --out out
```

## Key parameters
Input and ingestion:
- `--input`: CSV or Parquet path (file or dir)
- `--input-type`: `csv` or `parquet`
- `--schema`: SQL file to create the table before loading CSV
- `--csv-delimiter`, `--csv-header`, `--csv-nullstr`
- `--csv-sample-size -1`: full scan for better type inference
- `--csv-ignore-errors`: skip malformed rows

Query selection:
- `--auto-cols`: auto-pick `min_col`, `filter_col`, `filter_val`, `select_col`
- `--select-cols`: override which columns are used for selectivity (default: all numeric/date, non-constant)
- `--selectivities`: percentiles, e.g. `0.01,0.1,0.25,0.5,0.9`

Parquet:
- `--parquet-codec` (override a single codec)
- `--parquet-codecs` (default `zstd,snappy,uncompressed`)
- `--parquet-row-group-size`

Vortex:
- `--vortex-compact`: label only (DuckDB extension does not expose extra knobs)
- `--vortex-cast`: cast columns before Vortex write, format `col:TYPE`
- `--vortex-drop-cols`: drop columns before Vortex write

LIKE predicates:
- `--like-tests` / `--no-like-tests` (default: enabled)
- `--like-max-candidates` (default: 50)
- `--like-pattern-len` (default: 3)

Validation:
- Validation is on by default: compares row counts, min(), filtered counts, and null counts between base table and formats.
- Explicitly enable with `--validate-io`, or disable with `--no-validate-io`.

Plots:
- Per-dataset plots are written to `out/plots/<dataset>/`.
- Overall plots (geomean and dataset diversity) are written to `out/plots/overall/`.
- Plots include storage, scan/predicate latency, selectivity curves, LIKE summaries, NDV ratio, dataset size/rows, column type mix, and parquet codec comparisons.

Encoding schemes:
- Parquet encodings are read from metadata (PyArrow).
- Vortex encodings are best-effort via `display_tree()`; failures are reported as notes.

## Notes
- If your CSV has no header, do not use `--csv-header true`. It will treat the first data row as column names.
- If schema loading fails due to bad quotes, use `--csv-ignore-errors`.
- Vortex benchmarks run through DuckDB’s Vortex extension (`read_vortex`), so timings include file I/O and decoding inside DuckDB.

Commit message:

Add benchmark dashboard website and upload backend

README.md, after:

# File-Format-Comparison-Parquet-vs-Vortex

Simple benchmark to compare Parquet vs Vortex using DuckDB. The code loads a dataset into DuckDB, writes Parquet and Vortex, then runs the same queries on both formats.

## Approach
We compare formats inside DuckDB so the query engine is the same for both.

Pipeline:
1) Ingest CSV or Parquet into an in-memory DuckDB table.
2) Write Parquet (DuckDB COPY, compressed).
3) Write Vortex (DuckDB Vortex extension).
4) Run the same queries on Parquet and Vortex scans.
5) Save results to CSV/JSON/Markdown.

## Metrics
For each format we record:
- write time (compression_time_s) — lower is better
- output size (reported as size_mb) — lower is better
- compression ratio (input_size_bytes / output_size_bytes) — higher is better
- query latencies (median and p95) — lower is better
- selectivity timings for several percentiles — lower is better
- LIKE predicate timings on text columns — lower is better
- encoding schemes (Parquet metadata; Vortex best-effort) — informational
- validation checks (row count, min(), filtered count, null counts) — should match base table

Queries used:
- full_scan_min: `min(min_col)` over the full table
- selective_predicate: `min(min_col)` with `filter_col = filter_val`
- random_access: `SELECT * ... WHERE random_access_col = value LIMIT 1` (point lookup)
- selectivity: `min(min_col)` with `select_col <= threshold` at 1%, 10%, 25%, 50%, 90%

Column roles:
- min_col: the column used for `min(...)` queries (numeric/date with real variation)
- filter_col / filter_val: used to build the selective_predicate filter
- random_access_col: used for the point-lookup query
- select_cols: the list of columns used for selectivity curves

LIKE predicate tests:
- prefix: `pattern%`
- suffix: `%pattern`
- contains: `%pattern%`
We try to match target selectivities and report the actual match rate.

NDV ratio:
- Defined as NDV / rows for each column.
- Reported per column (top-10) and averaged by type (numeric/text/date/bool/other).

When `--auto-cols` is used, selectivity is run across all numeric/date columns that are not constant.

Recommendations in the report:
- storage-first: picks the format with the highest compression_ratio
- read-latency-first: picks the format with the lowest random_access median
- scan-first: picks the format with the lowest full_scan_min median

CSV row counts in the report:
- Input rows: number of rows in the CSV file (line count minus header if present).
- Dropped rows: `input_rows - loaded_rows`.
- Drop notes: short reasons (e.g., malformed rows, type conversion failures).

## Current results (from `out/`)
Reports already generated are stored under:
- `out/report_*.md` and `out/report_*.json`
- `out/results_*.csv`
- `out/overall_summary.md` and `out/overall_summary.json`

Observed patterns in those reports:
- Parquet output is usually smaller.
- Vortex often gives faster random-access timings.
- Exact numbers depend on the dataset and parsing options.

Check the latest report files for the full numbers:
- `out/report_CityMaxCapita_1.md`
- `out/report_Euro2016_1.md`
- `out/report_IGlocations1_1.md`
- `out/report_MedPayment2_1.md`

## Website (dashboard UI)
The `website/` dashboard is a presentation layer for benchmark outputs in `out/`. It provides a clear, decision‑oriented view of storage trade‑offs (compression, size, and query latency), with an overall summary, per‑dataset drill‑downs, and interactive visualizations (metrics, selectivity curves, LIKE predicate performance). A local upload workflow is available via the Flask backend to generate fresh reports and plots from new CSV inputs.

### Run the static pages (no upload)
From the repo root:
```bash
python -m http.server 8000
```
Then open:
- `http://localhost:8000/website/index.html`
- `http://localhost:8000/website/dataset.html`

### Run with upload + processing
The upload flow needs the Flask backend in `website/server.py`:
```bash
python -m pip install -r website/requirements.txt
python -m pip install -r bench/requirements.txt
python website/server.py
```
Then open:
- `http://localhost:5000/website/upload.html`

Notes:
- The upload pipeline writes new reports into `out/`.
- GitHub Pages can host the static pages, but it cannot run the upload backend.

## Files and responsibilities
- `bench/run.py`: main runner and CLI
- `bench/utils_run.py`: helper functions (auto-pick logic, SQL formatting, timing, validation, markdown)
- `bench/ingest/generic_ingest.py`: CSV/Parquet ingestion
- `bench/backends/parquet_backend.py`: Parquet write + scan expression
- `bench/backends/vortex_backend.py`: Vortex write + scan expression (DuckDB extension)
- `bench/report/report.py`: CSV/JSON/Markdown writers
- `bench/report/plots.py`: plot generation
- `bench/report/summary.py`: overall summary (markdown + JSON)

## Install
From this folder:
```bash
pip install -r bench/requirements.txt
```

## How to run

### 1) CSV with auto-pick (safe parsing)
Use when CSV is pipe-delimited and has no header (example: CityMaxCapita_1_vor.csv).
```bash
python3 bench/run.py \
  --input ../CityMaxCapita_1_vor.csv \
  --input-type csv \
  --auto-cols \
  --csv-delimiter '|' \
  --csv-header false \
  --csv-nullstr null \
  --csv-sample-size -1 \
  --out out
```

### 2) CSV with schema (strict types)
Use when you have a schema file and want fixed types.
```bash
python3 bench/run.py \
  --input ../Euro2016_1.csv \
  --input-type csv \
  --schema ../Euro2016_1.table.sql \
  --table Euro2016_1 \
  --csv-delimiter '|' \
  --csv-header false \
  --csv-nullstr null \
  --csv-ignore-errors \
  --auto-cols \
  --out out
```

### 3) Vortex options and validation (enabled by default)
```bash
python3 bench/run.py \
  --input ../Euro2016_1.csv \
  --input-type csv \
  --schema ../Euro2016_1.table.sql \
  --table Euro2016_1 \
  --csv-delimiter '|' \
  --csv-header false \
  --csv-nullstr null \
  --csv-ignore-errors \
  --auto-cols \
  --vortex-compact \
  --vortex-cast column01:BIGINT,column10:VARCHAR \
  --vortex-drop-cols tweet \
  --validate-io \
  --out out
```

## Key parameters
Input and ingestion:
- `--input`: CSV or Parquet path (file or dir)
- `--input-type`: `csv` or `parquet`
- `--schema`: SQL file to create the table before loading CSV
- `--csv-delimiter`, `--csv-header`, `--csv-nullstr`
- `--csv-sample-size -1`: full scan for better type inference
- `--csv-ignore-errors`: skip malformed rows

Query selection:
- `--auto-cols`: auto-pick `min_col`, `filter_col`, `filter_val`, `select_col`
- `--select-cols`: override which columns are used for selectivity (default: all numeric/date, non-constant)
- `--selectivities`: percentiles, e.g. `0.01,0.1,0.25,0.5,0.9`

Parquet:
- `--parquet-codec` (override a single codec)
- `--parquet-codecs` (default `zstd,snappy,uncompressed`)
- `--parquet-row-group-size`

Vortex:
- `--vortex-compact`: label only (DuckDB extension does not expose extra knobs)
- `--vortex-cast`: cast columns before Vortex write, format `col:TYPE`
- `--vortex-drop-cols`: drop columns before Vortex write

LIKE predicates:
- `--like-tests` / `--no-like-tests` (default: enabled)
- `--like-max-candidates` (default: 50)
- `--like-pattern-len` (default: 3)

Validation:
- Validation is on by default: compares row counts, min(), filtered counts, and null counts between base table and formats.
- Explicitly enable with `--validate-io`, or disable with `--no-validate-io`.

Plots:
- Per-dataset plots are written to `out/plots/<dataset>/`.
- Overall plots (geomean and dataset diversity) are written to `out/plots/overall/`.
- Plots include storage, scan/predicate latency, selectivity curves, LIKE summaries, NDV ratio, dataset size/rows, column type mix, and parquet codec comparisons.

Encoding schemes:
- Parquet encodings are read from metadata (PyArrow).
- Vortex encodings are best-effort via `display_tree()`; failures are reported as notes.

## Notes
- If your CSV has no header, do not use `--csv-header true`. It will treat the first data row as column names.
- If schema loading fails due to bad quotes, use `--csv-ignore-errors`.
- Vortex benchmarks run through DuckDB’s Vortex extension (`read_vortex`), so timings include file I/O and decoding inside DuckDB.
